

 
 
Michael Copeland, CSM 
3609 Canoe Birch Ct. 
Fairfax, VA 22033 
703.209.6693 
michael@michaelcopeland.com 
 
 
P R O F I L E 
With my extensive background in software development, spanning the last 21 
years, I have developed applications, full-stack, using languages from C# to Java 
and JavaScript (Node.JS). I bring an eagerness to learn new technologies and to 
apply new patterns to solve problems, always striving to stay atop the trends of 
the ever-changing world of software development. I am seeking a position in 
software development with the opportunity to continue my passions in learning 
new technology stacks. 
E X P E R I E N C E 
Software Development Advisor, GDIT Inc., Chantilly, VA — 2003-Present 
 
Refugee Arrivals Data System   
Currently developer across multiple Spring MVC Applications. Responsible for 
migration of URM, a data system for tracking unaccompanied minors’ access to 
refugee benefits, to a separate Spring MVC application. Modernized UI across 
screens to speed page load and standardize look and feel. Encapsulated 
common design elements into a standalone Spring application to both serve as a 
style guide as well as a library of components and services to be used across 
applications. Developing a service locator mobile application using Flutter, to 
allow location of refugee services via devices using iOS and Android. Built a 
survey system for communication with refugees to gauge their success in 
locating services upon entry to the US. Developed front end application using 
Webpack and NodeJS to provide a fast-loading mobile responsive site for use on 
phones. Configurations created to deploy application via S3 or self-contained 
NodeJS server via AWS EC2 instances. Application interfaces with Spring Boot 
API to serve user-customizable survey questions, storing data for future 
reporting. Implementing notifications using Amazon Pinpoint to provide survey 
notifications to users via email, SMS and WhatsApp.  
 
Implemented JIRA workflows for development and communications teams. 
Implemented scrum practices for a small development team which grew as the 
contract progressed. Implemented daily standups. Conducted sprint plannings 
with development teams. Introduced estimation and release planning concepts to 
project management team and development team to ensure delivery of tasks on 
time. Introduced concept of velocity to team to aid in planning of work. Managed 
releases through automated tasks in JIRA as well as generation of release notes. 
Generated daily status reports using Automated rules. Assisted development 

 
 
team in creation of dashboards to facilitate best practices for development team. 
Migrated existing hosted instance of JIRA to Atlassian along with Zephyr plugin 
information.  
 
VA File Conversion Services 
Developed multiple Grails and AWS applications. Responsible for maintaining 
modular system in charge of maintaining shipping logistics and file scanning for 
the Department of Veteran Affairs. Developed rich UIs using jQuery and CSS. 
Provided real-time reporting using dashboards accessing AWS Lambda functions 
reporting data from Dynamo DB and SQL Server. Developed API using Lambda 
functions to record data from partners providing scanning data for Veteran 
claims. Ensured UI maintains standards for accessibility and 508 using Deque 
Axe.  
 
Mailbox Zero 
Developed automated processing routines using UI Path for a project to process 
PDFs from email inboxes. Utilized Tesseract OCR engine to read data within a 
reliable accuracy to aid in processing of Veteran records.   Developed multiple 
robot processes to read different Veteran claim forms and versions for 
processing. Worked to train algorithms in built in Tesseract engine to recognize 
both system font and handwriting, within a reasonable degree of accuracy. 
Developed Python scripts to create JSON from data read via OCR from PDF 
forms for storage in DynamoDB calling APIs created in AWS Lambda functions. 
Aided in orchestration process for multiple bot processes reading from AWS SNS 
queues to kickoff PDF OCR scanning processes. 
 
 
Vets.gov API 
Served as Scrum Master across two Agile development teams. Performed sprint 
ceremonies across two-week sprints for development and DevOps teams. 
Calculated team capacity and managed tasking, ensuring deliverables were 
completed as promised within sprint constraints. Oversaw migration of Sprint 
applications to Spring Boot based microservices in an AWS hosted architecture, 
utilizing Docker containers along with AWS provided services. Performed 
additional development tasks as needed providing software architecture input. 
Created POCs leveraging Lambda based applications, creating APIs using 
Lambda, API Gateway and DynamoDB. Created scriptable APIs using AWS 
CloudFormation templates to allow for local development as well as source 
deployable APIs.    
 
EVSS 
Served as an application developer and technical lead across multiple projects, 
from inception to maintenance. Currently serving as a Lead Front-End Developer 
and System Architect for the EVSS project, eBenefits.va.gov. Responsible for 
oversight and implementation of a site redesign, incorporating responsive design 
using the Skeleton CSS framework and creation of a library of custom UI 

 
 
components for use across multiple codebases comprising the eBenefits 
application. Facilitates development across the front-end and back-end teams, 
assisting in migration of the legacy application into an API backend with MVC 
front end. Implemented a build system for a team of front-end developers using 
Grunt, to provide Sass/Compass compilation, JavaScript minification and 
concatenation, code listing using ESLint, and a front-end test suite for each 
component using QUnit to eliminate regression bugs in the CI process. Provides 
peer review for members of application development team as well as oversees 
front end development across application teams. Responsible for 508 testing and 
remediation using FireEyes and JAWS. Serves as System Architect on the 
project Architecture Review Board. Responsible for researching and 
recommending technologies to be implemented across the application. 
Developed a user notification system to send push notifications to users in real 
time of system queued events using Node.JS, Faye (pub/sub) and Angular.  
Grants.gov 
Previously developed grants.gov, a Grails application to support grants 
management across multiple clients. Developed business workflow system 
(BPM) for defining activities and events across the grants management lifecycle. 
Used XML to define customizable workflows. Developed application to process 
medical research grant applications via web-based UI. Provided PDF export 
capability using Apache POI and iText libraries. Troubleshot issues with Tomcat 
servers using JMeter to simulate application load and provide benchmarks for 
response times. Used JVM debugging tools to analyze and troubleshoot 
application slow response times. Created SQL Server reports to provide analytics 
to business. Utilized stored procedures and views to provide customizable 
reports engine. Developed customizable reporting UI front end using JQuery. 
 
EPA/National Response Team 
Rearchitected a web-based application to migrate existing Lotus Notes based 
application. Created and maintained customizable online catalog using a Flex 
based application. Assisted in migration of application into a LAMP based AWS 
hosted stack. Created deployable EC2 images on AWS to facilitate migration and 
failover.  
 
AN E C D O T AL F R E E L AN C E E X P E R I E N C E 
Developed bot process, using UIVision RPA to create an automated process to 
login to a tee time registration application at a local golf course. Allowed for quick 
customization on the fly to change intended month day and time range to look for 
available tee times for varying sizes of playing groups at various time ranges. 

 
 
Successfully ran processes, scheduling times, including processing payment via 
credit card to reserve tee times over the summer of 2020. 
 
C E R T I F I C AT I O N S 
Certified Scrum Master (CSM) – Scrum Alliance March 2017 
E D U C AT I O N 
B.S. (Computer Science), University of Maryland, College Park, 2003 
S K I L L S 
Programming Languages: Groovy, C#.net, C++, Java, Python, Web Services 
(REST/SOAP), XML, XSLT,  JavaScript, ActionScript/Flash/Flex, HTML, CSS, 
PHP, T-SQL, PL/SQL, MySQL 
Frameworks and Libraries: Grails, Spring MVC, Spring Boot/jHipster, Fusebox, 
jQuery, jQueryUI, YUI, Bootstrap, Skeleton, Node.JS/Express, Faye (pub/sub), 
Firebase, Meteor 
Automation/RPA Tools: UI Path, UIVision RPA 
CI: Jenkins/Hudson, Grunt, NPM, ESLint/JSLint, SassLint, QUnit 
Search Appliances: Verity K2, Google Search Appliance, Solr 
Application Servers: Apache HTTP Server, IIS, Tomcat, Oracle Weblogic 
Applications/IDEs: IntelliJ Eclipse, Vim, Adobe Creative Suite, GIMP, Microsoft 
SQL Server 2008/T-SQL, MySQL, Oracle 11g, PL/SQL Developer, Ant, Maven, 
Git, SVN 
Screen Readers: JAWS, IBM Home Page Reader, Deque Axe 